Document the behavior of R_RISCV_ALIGN (#210)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc: riscv-elf.adoc

    sw t2, t0, %pcrel_lo(label)   # R_RISCV_PCREL_LO12_S (label)
----

==== Relocation for Alignment

The relocation type `R_RISCV_ALIGN` marks a location that must be aligned to

> `N`-bytes, where `N` is the value of the addend field; this relocation is only

Reviewer: The addend is currently the number of bytes of NOPs emitted, which you can then use to infer what N is.

Reviewer: (and the relocation is to the start of the NOP sequence, not the instruction you want to align)

Author: Fixed... I should check binutils implementation before I written :(

    sw t2, t0, %pcrel_lo(label)   # R_RISCV_PCREL_LO12_S (label)
----

==== Relocation for Alignment

The relocation type `R_RISCV_ALIGN` marks a location that must be aligned to
`N`-bytes, where `N` is the smallest power of two that greater than the value
of the addend field, e.g. `R_RISCV_ALIGN` with addend value 2 means align to 4
bytes; this relocation is only required if the containing section
has any `R_RISCV_RELAX` relocations.

The reason why we need a special relocation for handing alignment is because
code relaxation might shrink the code during the linking process, that may
cause an aligned point become mis-aligned after code relaxation.

> In order to let the linker have enough space to make sure the alignment
> requirement can be met after code relaxation, the assembler must insert a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure the linker can always satisfy the required alignment solely by deleting bytes, the assembler must emit a
```
(the key thing is that this means the linker only ever needs to _delete_ bytes, which allows various invariants to hold and make implementing relaxation much more feasible)
(and s/insert/emit/)

> `R_RISCV_ALIGN` relocation and then insert `N` - 4 padding bytes or `N` - 2

Reviewer: I don't see it defined anywhere that the addend is how many bytes of padding have been inserted?

> `R_RISCV_ALIGN` relocation and then insert `N` - 4 padding bytes or `N` - 2
> padding bytes if the C extension is enabled, the padding bytes insert before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`R_RISCV_ALIGN` relocation and then insert `N - IALIGN` padding bytes before
```
though this is kind of the wrong order to define it, the alignment directive points at the code to align with the padding preceding it, so it would make sense for the spec here to talk about the padding bytes and then the relocation in that order

> the location of the alignment diretive like `.align`, `.p2align` or `.balign`,

Reviewer: Too assembly-specific (LLVM doesn't have alignment directives in any of its code by default because it never gets turned into assembly, for example)

Author: Use compiler and/or assembler term here, and add sentence `or emit by compiler directly`.

the addend value of that relocation is the number of padding bytes;

> linker may remove arbitrary numbers of the padding bytes at the linking process

Reviewer: Arbitrary is not true, cannot remove more than the amount of padding there is otherwise you break anything. Otherwise per this spec a legal implementation of R_RISCV_ALIGN would be to delete everything before it so it starts at 0.

to meet the alignment requirement.

The assembler and linker must ensure padding bytes are valid instructions like

> `nop` or `c.nop` if possible.

Reviewer: Stronger than that, they must have no side-effects, and don't you have to be careful about having a 4-byte NOP where you end up only deleting half of it?

Author: Good point, added more description to say linker must ensure those instructions are no side-effect and aligned to `IALIGN`.

----

==== Relocation for Alignment

The relocation type `R_RISCV_ALIGN` marks a location that must be aligned to
`N`-bytes, where `N` is the smallest power of two that greater than the value
of the addend field, e.g. `R_RISCV_ALIGN` with addend value 2 means align to 4
bytes; this relocation is only required if the containing section has any
`R_RISCV_RELAX` relocations.

To ensure the linker can always satisfy the required alignment solely by
deleting bytes, the compiler or assembler must emit a `R_RISCV_ALIGN` relocation
and then insert `N - IALIGN` padding bytes before the location where we need to
align, it could be mark by an alignment diretive like `.align`, `.p2align` or
`.balign` or emit by compiler directly, the addend value of that relocation
is the number of padding bytes.

The compiler and assembler must ensure padding bytes are valid instructions
without any side-effect like `nop` or `c.nop`, and make sure those instructions
are aligned to IALIGN if possible.

The linker may remove part of the padding bytes at the linking process to meet
the alignment requirement, and make sure those padding bytes still are valid

> instructions and each instruction is aligned to at least IALIGN byte.

Reviewer 2: In the first sentence, it is not required to always use `nop` or `c.nop`, so the compiler or the assembler can emit arbitrary instructions as long as they have no side effects.

The second sentence says that it is linker's responsibility to keep instructions legal after removing bytes. I think its hard to satisfy, as the linker is usually agnostic about machine instructions. If we really ensure that, we need to teach the linker about the all possible valid nop instructions.

So, I think we should move the responsibility from the linker to the compiler/assembler. The linker should always remove bytes from the end of padding, and the compiler/assembler has to guarantee that the instructions are valid after removing bytes. This is actually what we are doing right now; we should just clarify that.

Reviewer 3: The number of NOP bytes modulo 4 may be 0 or 2. R_RISCV_ALIGN relaxation may change the state from 0 to 2, or from 2 to 0. So the linker has to rewrite the code sequence, regardless of what compiler/assembler does (since we are not going to do #183).

Reviewer 2: If the linker has to rewrite NOPs to fill the padding, what was the point of writing NOPs in object files? We could have wrote no NOPs to object files and instead just say "align this instruction at 2^n" by R_RISC_ALIGN, and the linker would align that location to a specified boundary and write NOPs to the padding caused by the alignment specification. It looks like we didn't have to emit bunch of NOPs after R_RISCV_ALIGN.

Reviewer 2: On second thought, is that actually a problem? I mean R_RISCV_ALIGN with 2^1 alignment requirement doesn't make much sense, as it is always satisfied. So we always remove a number of bytes multiple of 4.

Author: > So we always remove a number of bytes multiple of 4.

We might remove byte with non-multiple-of-4 in some case:

Consider following case:
```
foo:
        call    bar
        c.nop
.balign 8
        add t1, t2, t3
```

`$ riscv64-unknown-elf-as -c x.s  -o x.o -mrelax -march=rv32gc`
```
00000000 <foo>:
   0:   00000097                auipc   ra,0x0
                        0: R_RISCV_CALL bar
                        0: R_RISCV_RELAX        *ABS*
   4:   000080e7                jalr    ra # 0 <foo>
   8:   0001                    nop
   a:   0001                    nop
                        a: R_RISCV_ALIGN        *ABS*+0x6
   c:   00000013                nop
  10:   01c38333                add     t1,t2,t3
```

And that might result 3 different results:

- auipc + jalr can't relax: no padding removed.

```
00000000 <foo>:
   0:   00000097                auipc   ra,0x0
   4:   000080e7                jalr    ra # 0 <foo>
   8:   0001                    c.nop
   a:   0001                    c.nop
   c:   00000013                nop
  10:   01c38333                add     t1,t2,t3
```

- auipc + jalr relaxed to jal: 4 byte padding removed.
```
00000000 <foo>:
   0:   000080e7                jal     <foo>
   4:   0001                    c.nop
   6:   0001                    c.nop # Delete first 4 byte and rewrite last 2 byte to c.nop
   8:   01c38333                add     t1,t2,t3
```

- auipc + jalr relaxed to c.jal: 2 byte padding removed.

```
00000000 <foo>:
   0:   0000                c.jal    ra # 0 <foo>
   2:   0001                    nop
   4:   00000013                nop # Delete 2 byte
  8:   01c38333                add     t1,t2,t3
```

Reviewer 2: Ah, good point. Then maybe we have no choice other than making it a responsibility of the static linker to fill gaps with appropriate number of c.nop and nop operations.

Reviewer 4: > If the linker has to rewrite NOPs to fill the padding, what was the point of writing NOPs in object files?

Good question. Even if the relaxation design doesn't really require it, I think it's still a good idea to do that because that's a lot clearer when you're looking at the unlinked object files. I can't think of a scenario where the compiler would benefit from having the flexibility to choose other instructions but maybe you can think of something?

Author: > If the linker has to rewrite NOPs to fill the padding, what was the point of writing NOPs in object files? We could have wrote no NOPs to object files and instead just say "align this instruction at 2^n" by R_RISC_ALIGN, and the linker would align that location to a specified boundary and write NOPs to the padding caused by the alignment specification. It looks like we didn't have to emit bunch of NOPs after R_RISCV_ALIGN.

We are trying do only code shrink, and do not insert new code during the linker relaxation process, that could prevent we made any branch/jump become out-of-range, RISC-V ISA has relative short branch and jump range* compare to other architecture, so once jump is out-of-range we need using indirect-jump to resolve, but it's almost impossible at the linker stage.

* +-4k for branch, and +-1M for jump.

    sw t2, t0, %pcrel_lo(label)   # R_RISCV_PCREL_LO12_S (label)
----

==== Relocation for Alignment

The relocation type `R_RISCV_ALIGN` marks a location that must be aligned to

> `N`-bytes, where `N` is the smallest power of two that greater than the value

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`N`-bytes, where `N` is the smallest power of two that is greater than the value
```

of the addend field, e.g. `R_RISCV_ALIGN` with addend value 2 means align to 4

> bytes; this relocation is only required if the containing section has any

Reviewer 4: "the smallest power of two that is greater than the value of the addend field" -> `2^2 = 4` is equal, not greater, so this becomes a bit confusing to read. Also, it's not immediately obvious what is the relationship between `N` and `addend`. Regardless of those specific issues, having two or more examples would help disambiguate between possible interpretations that the reader might have.

align, it could be mark by an alignment diretive like `.align`, `.p2align` or
`.balign` or emit by compiler directly, the addend value of that relocation
is the number of padding bytes.

The compiler and assembler must ensure padding bytes are valid instructions
without any side-effect like `nop` or `c.nop`, and make sure those instructions
are aligned to IALIGN if possible.

The linker may remove part of the padding bytes at the linking process to meet
the alignment requirement, and make sure those padding bytes still are valid
instructions and each instruction is aligned to at least IALIGN byte.

NOTE: `R_RISCV_ALIGN` relocation is needed because code relaxation can shrink
preceding code during the linking process, which may cause an aligned location
to become mis-aligned.

NOTE: IALIGN means the instruction-address alignment constraint. IALIGN is 4
bytes in the base ISA, but some ISA extensions, including the compressed ISA
extension, relax IALIGN to 2 bytes. IALIGN may not take on any value other than
4 or 2, this term is also defined in `The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual` in
similar meaning, the only difference is the psABI defined that in byte and

> the ISA manual defined that in bits.

Reviewer 4: Can you link to this note when `IALIGN` is first mentioned?

> 4 or 2, this term is also defined in `The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual` in
> similar meaning, the only difference is the psABI defined that in byte and
> the ISA manual defined that in bits.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4 or 2. This term is also defined in `The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual` with a
similar meaning, the only difference being it is specified in terms of the number
of bits instead of the number of bytes.
```
